Start the Nessus Service:

Windows: Starts automatically after installation.

Linux: Use this command to start the service

sudo systemctl start nessusd

Access the Web Interface:

Open a browser and navigate to:arduino

https://localhost:8834

Activate Nessus:

Enter the Activation Code (from the Tenable website).

Choose Nessus Essentials (Free) or Nessus Professional
(Paid).

Unit 3 : Cyber Security Tools

Configure Nessus for Scanning

1. Login to Nessus:

Enter your credentials in the web interface.

Create a New Scan:

Click on “New Scan” > Choose a Scan Template (e.g., Basic Network Scan).

2. Configure Scan Settings:

Name: Set a descriptive name for the scan.

Targets: Enter IP addresses, domains, or ranges (e.g., 192.168.1.1/24).

Scan Policy: Customize scanning depth (e.g., Credentialed for in-depth
analysis).

Add Credentials (Optional):

For deeper scanning, provide SSH (Linux) or Windows credentials.

Go to Credentials tab > Add new login information.

Unit 3 : Cyber Security Tools

3 . Run and Monitor the Scan

Start the Scan:

Click Launch to begin scanning the specified targets.

Monitor Scan Progress:

View real-time scan status on the dashboard.

Large networks may take longer to complete.

4. Analyze Scan Results

View Results:

Once completed, click on the scan name to see the details.

Understand Vulnerabilities:

Severity Levels:

Critical (Red) – Immediate action required.

High (Orange) – Major risks.

Medium (Yellow) – Moderate risks.

Low (Blue) – Minor issues.

Unit 3 : Cyber Security Tools

5. Export and Share Reports

Generate Reports:

Go to the completed scan > Click Export.

Choose Formats: PDF, CSV, HTML, or Nessus format.

Share Reports:

Send reports to your security team for mitigation.

6. Automate and Schedule Scans

Schedule a Scan:

While creating a new scan, go to Schedule.

Set up daily, weekly, or monthly scans for continuous
monitoring.

Unit 3 : Cyber Security Tools

7. Update Nessus Regularly

Update Plugins:

Ensure Nessus is updated to detect the latest vulnerabilities.

Use the command:

sudo systemctl restart nessusd

8. Best Practices for Nessus Usage

Use Credentialed Scans: For better detection of internal
vulnerabilities.

Segment Networks: Scan different network zones
separately.

Prioritize Critical Issues: Focus on resolving high and
critical vulnerabilities first.

Review Regularly: Schedule periodic reviews and scans for
new vulnerabilities.